---
permalink: /
title: "About"
excerpt: "About me"
author_profile: true
redirect_from: 
  - /about/
  - /about.html
---

Hi! I am Davide, a [sensory and consumer scientist](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sensory_analysis) and an Associate Professor at the Section for [Innovation and Design Engineering](https://www.sdu.dk/en/forskning/sduinnovationanddesignengineering), Dept. of Technology and Innovation, at the University of Southern Denmark ([SDU](https://www.sdu.dk/en)). 

My main interest and long-term goal as a scientist is to understand how consumers experience and behave towards food and beverages, and to apply this knowledge to the design of healthy and sustainable foods of the future. At SDU, I established and lead the [Sustainable Food Innovation](https://www.sdu.dk/en/forskning/sduinnovationanddesignengineering/researchareas/sustainablefoodinnovation) research group (currently composed of four full-time members plus one part-time affiliated researcher) which focuses on sensory and consumer science with applications in food product development and optimization. Research in my group is closely related to ongoing Danish and European programs on health and sustainability, such as the EU Farm to Fork strategy and the Danish Grøn Omstilling. As an example, recent and ongoing projects have focused on reducing households’ food waste, improving intake of fruit and vegetables, identifying barriers to consumption of plant-based foods and beverages, working with converting side streams from meat and dairy processing into value-added products, and improving the nutritional content of food products targeted at vulnerable consumers. 

My work and research
======
Tackling complex challenges, like achieving sustainable food production and consumption, require interdisciplinary skills. At the same time, I believe in order to contribute meaningfully and have fruitful collaborations with other researchers, it is necessary to have very strong foundations in a core scientific area. For me that core area is sensory and consumer science, a field which I am extremely passionate about, and which has great potential to solve many real-world issues. My research follows three main streams:

### 1. How to measure consumer responses to products?
This research stream includes applied and fundamental work on product characterization with both consumers and expert panels. Research focus have included method development and validation, evaluation of the effect of expertise on sensory performance, and advances in sensometrics (data analyses of sensory and consumer data). My research has contributed, together with that of others, towards a shift towards a more nuanced view on human capabilities for sensory evaluation, and to understand how untrained and semi-trained assessors can generate valuable data, compared to the traditional view in sensory and consumer science that analytical and affective testing should be kept completely separated, and that consumers could only tell you what they like or dislike. While this is a positive development, there is an increasing need to understand more in depth how different sensory methods actually work (they are not all the same, so simply comparing the results to a standard doesn’t tell the whole story). I am especially interested in methodological work to develop best-practices in applied product testing, in order to fit different situations and different types of assessors. This is often born out of practical problems, e.g. issues faced by companies with whom I collaborate, but provide interesting opportunities for developing the field. Relatedly, I am also very interested in sensometrics, in particular as it pertains to data modeling of individual differences in both sensory and affective responses to foods products.

### 2. Relating perceptual measurements to consumer behavior. 
One of my long-term research goals is to understand how perceptual responses to products collected during sensory tests predict actual behavior. Although the ultimate purpose of collecting such responses is that they are predictive of what consumers will like, choose and consume in their everyday life, such data are very rarely validated against actual consumer behaviour. This is a long-standing issue with many practical consequences – for example, in commercial R&D it is well known that a large fraction (75-90%) of new foods and beverages introduced in the market fails within one year of lunch. One of the main reasons for this is often a single-minded reliance on a specific measure of product performance – such as liking or willingness-to-pay – as criterion to guide product development and optimization projects. A crucial, yet often overlooked, aspect is the effect of contextual variables on consumer responses to products. I have started working on this topic years ago, in collaboration with the University of Naples, where we demonstrated that evaluating foods in different testing situations majorly affected product preferences, and actually could lead to very different conclusions as to which product characteristics would fare well in the marketplace. In the last ten years I have worked extensively on the concept of situational appropriateness, i.e., the degree of fit between products and intended usage contexts, in collaboration with Dr. Sara Jaeger. This line of work indicated that situational appropriateness is an important predictor of food choice; especially when consumers choose between alternatives that are relatively close in eating quality (which is typically the case for commercial products), appropriateness is a far better predictor of choice than liking ratings. Other interesting findings included establishing that the relationship between appropriateness and liking is non-linear (i.e., it is important for liked products but not disliked products), and that consumers can reliably be segmented into two major groups with respect to how much they follow social rules and conventions about foods and beverages, a finding which we independently confirmed cross-culturally in three difference countries. In recent years, we have seen an increase in the uptake of situational appropriateness responses as well as other perceptual measures that go “beyond liking”, with interest primarily focusing on product-elicited emotions and conceptualisations. Much of the existing research is however concerned with issues of internal validity (e.g. is a certain measure repeatable? does it discriminate between the samples?), and not nearly enough on issues of external validity, i.e. on whether it is relevant for predicting behavior. We need cross-disciplinary studies benchmarking perceptual measures against relevant product performance data such as choices, food frequencies questionnaires, dietary recalls, observational data, etc. This is difficult to do in practise as it breaks cross-disciplinary boundaries, but I think it is absolutely essentially to do sensory work that actually matters.

### 3. Individual differences in sensory perception and preferences towards food and beverages. 
I have worked on individual differences – analytical (e.g., learning and performance on sensory tests), affective (e.g., learning and preference formation), cognitive (e.g., food neophobia and food-related attitudes), situational (e.g., dietary habits), and emotional (e.g., response to novelty and arousal). From an applied perspective, I am keen on research that can capture individual differences early in the product development process, to ensure that new products can optimally cater to the tastes of the intended target group. This is very relevant also with respect to adoption of plant-based as my research, as well as that of others, show that consumers look for different things when it comes to adoption of plant-based products. A single sensory profile and/or value proposition is unlikely to reach all groups simultaneously. This recognition should be central in product development efforts, which should shy away from “one-size-fits-all” thinking and instead look for targeted approaches that optimally cater to different consumer segments. In this context, I have solid experience in multivariate statistical techniques to relate product characteristics and consumer preferences, as well as clustering techniques to segment consumers based on demographic, psychographic and behavioral characteristics of interest. In the future, I find it important to focus more on how physiological differences between consumers affect eating behavior (e.g., how to deal with consumers who have a certain genetic makeup, such as prop supertasters, for whom it may be harder to adopt a plant-based diet). One of my current projects focuses on how individual differences in oral and gut microbiota composition affect sensory perception, acceptability and food habits. We have conducted longitudinal studies in both Italy and Denmark, thus taking dietary variation into account, and considered both water solutions and real food matrices. Our data suggest a clear link between oral and gut microbiota and differences in sensory responsiveness to oral stimuli in real foods, including related to the perception of fruit and vegetables. Results of this project are expected to provide a new significant contribution on the understanding of the fundamentals of sensory perception of food that may lead to a deeper understanding of our eating behavior and to the development of both new strategies promoting healthier eating habits.


My background and history
======
I am originally Italian and have lived in Denmark since 2004. My background is highly interdisciplinary and combines social science, natural science, and engineering. I originally trained in political science and economics,then went on to doing a PhD in Food Science on consumer preferences for craft beers which had the time were all the rage and went on to working at an industrial have worked in the field ever since and have been employed since 2015 in an industrial engineering department at SDU. My education and employments have given me a diverse set of competences which are essential to tackle the complex problem of sustainable eating from a cross-disciplinary perspective, as well as a broad network of collaborators with different scientific expertise that I can draw on for scientific advice, grant applications and other collaborative endeavors. 

What you will find in these pages
------
XXX.
