---
redirect_from: 
  - /research/
  - /research.html
---

My work and research
======
My field of research is sensory and consumer science, that is, the study of human perception of food and other consumer products. It is a highly interdisciplinary field that combines food analysis, experimental psychology, physiology, behavioral science and statistics. This interdisciplinarity is a challenge but it makes sensory and consumer science highly relevant to tackle real-world industrial problems (e.g., which charcteristics should a product has in order to be succesful in the market) and tackling societal challenges (e.g., how can we more eating habits in a more sustainable direction). 

My research work in this field follows three main streams:

### 1. How to measure consumer responses to products (and with whom)
This research stream includes applied and fundamental work on product characterization with both consumers and expert panels. When I started out, there was a strong belief in the field that only highly trained experts could give valid information about products, and that consumers else could only tell you whether they like or dislike something. My research has contributed, together with that of others, towards a shift towards a more nuanced view on human capabilities for sensory evaluation, and to understand how untrained and semi-trained assessors can generate valuable data, provided that the methods are fine-tuned accordingly. I am especially interested in methodological work to develop best-practices in applied product testing, in order to fit different situations and different types of assessors. 

### 2. Relating perceptual measurements to consumer behavior
One of my long-term research goals is to understand how perceptual responses to products collected during product tests with consumers predict actual behavior. This is a long-standing issue with many practical consequences – for example, in commercial R&D it is well known that a large fraction (75-90%) of new foods and beverages introduced in the market fails within one year of lunch. There are, of course many reasons for this but some of them have to do with the way products are tested with consumers. Two issues that are in my opinion critical are a single reliance on a specific product performance metric (e.g., product liking) and a disregard for the context in which the consumers experience food products. I have worked extensively on addressing these issues by working with a wide variety of perceptual measures and situational aspects of product perception. One of my pet peeves regarding the sensory and consumer field is that when designing product tests the focus is generally on internal validity (i.e., having tight control over the experiment in order to have high quality data) rather than external validity (i.e. collecting data that *actually* predict consumer behavior). I am particularly interested in benchmarking perceptual measures obtained in product test against real-world performance data such as choices, dietary recalls, sales volumes, etc. This is difficult to do in practise but it is absolutely essentially to do sensory work that actually matters and doing so generally produces eye-opening insights.

### 3. Understanding individual differences in sensory perception and preferences 
Definitely not one size fits all when it comes to food perception and preferences. I am keen on research that can capture individual differences early in the product development process, to ensure that new products can optimally cater to the tastes of different consumer groups. In this context, I have solid experience in multivariate statistical techniques to relate product characteristics and consumer preferences, as well as clustering techniques to segment consumers based on demographic, psychographic or behavioral characteristics of interest. In the future, I find it important to focus more on how physiological differences between consumers affect eating behavior as this is an important yet often overlooked barrier to eating more healthily and sustainably (e.g., consumers with a certin genetic makeup, may find it harder to adopt a plant-based diet). One of my current projects focuses on how individual differences in oral and gut microbiota composition affect sensory perception, acceptability and food habits. 


My background and history
======
My background is highly interdisciplinary and quite unique really as it combines social science, natural science, and engineering. I originally trained in political science and economics in Italy (LUISS University in Rome) and Denmark (University of Southern Denmark in Odense), then went on to doing a PhD in Food Science at the University of Copenhagen on consumer preferences for craft beers, followed by a postdoc on developing protein-enriched in vulnerable demographics. I then moved "back" to SDU in 2015, this time to an industrial engineering department focusing on user experiences of both food (mainly) and non-food products (e.g. audio and textiles) connected to the civil Engineering programme [Product Development and Innovation](https://www.sdu.dk/en/uddannelse/kandidat/product-development-innovation). My education and employments have given me a diverse set of competences as well as a broad network of diverse collaborators that I am able to draw on in my work. 

On the personal side, I am originally Italian but moved to Denmark in the now far 2004. I live in Copenhagen with my partner Christine and our son Marco. 
