---
title: "Barriers to consumption of plant-based beverages: A comparison of product users and non-users on emotional, conceptual, situational, conative and psychographic variables"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2021-paper-title-number-5
excerpt: 'Production and consumption practices that reduce the environmental burden of eating and drinking and promote global sustainability are of paramount interest. Against this background, we present a quantitative study of US adults’ perceptions of selected non-alcoholic beverages including pairs of regular and plant-based alternatives (iced coffee/iced coffee with almond milk, fruit smoothie/fruit smoothie with soy milk and cow’s milk/oat milk). Particular focus was directed to comparing product perceptions of consumers who never consumed these plant-based alternatives with those who did (n = 249 and n = 274), as a means for contextualising the barriers that hinder uptake among non-users...'
date: 2021-05-01
venue: 'Food Research International'
paperurl: 'http://academicpages.github.io/files/paper3.pdf'
citation: 'Jaeger, S. R., & Giacalone, D. (2021). Barriers to consumption of plant-based beverages: A comparison of product non-users and users on emotional, conceptual, situational, conative and psychographic variables. <i>Food Research International, 144</i>, 110363.'
---

[Download paper here](http://academicpages.github.io/files/paper3.pdf)

Production and consumption practices that reduce the environmental burden of eating and drinking and promote global sustainability are of paramount interest. Against this background, we present a quantitative study of US adults’ perceptions of selected non-alcoholic beverages including pairs of regular and plant-based alternatives (iced coffee/iced coffee with almond milk, fruit smoothie/fruit smoothie with soy milk and cow’s milk/oat milk). Particular focus was directed to comparing product perceptions of consumers who never consumed these plant-based alternatives with those who did (n = 249 and n = 274), as a means for contextualising the barriers that hinder uptake among non-users. The data were collected via an online survey with a multi-response empirical strategy where the beverages were characterised using a large set of emotional, conceptual, situational, and attitudinal/behavioural variables. Fitting expectations, negative associations were dominant in the group of consumers who never consumed the plant-based beverage variants. However, these associations were product dependent and decreased in the order: oat milk, fruit smoothie with soy milk and iced coffee with almond milk. This pointed to a likely interplay of sensory properties, situational appropriateness and household routines. Food neophobia negatively influenced perceptions of less familiar products, including but not limited to plant-based beverages. While the research was limited to a small number of beverages and plant-based alternatives, it identified the important role that in-depth and product-specific investigations have in helping to uncover and overcome barriers to sustainable eating and drinking solutions. 

Recommended citation: Jaeger, S. R., & Giacalone, D. (2021). Barriers to consumption of plant-based beverages: A comparison of product non-users and users on emotional, conceptual, situational, conative and psychographic variables. <i>Food Research International, 144</i>, 110363.
