---
title: "Conceptualizing a gluten-free instant noodle prototype using environmental sustainability aspects: A cross-national qualitative study on Thai and Danish consumers"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2022-paper-title-number-10
excerpt: 'Gluten-free food products have been developed to satisfy the needs of consumers with celiac disease. However, there has been little research on the product feature development of sustainable gluten-free instant noodles through a qualitative study to explore the customer insights related to environmental attitude and purchase decision. Using a cross-national comparative study between Thai and Danish consumers, this study aims to (1) identify the target customer segments for each country; (2) explore the target customer segments regarding behaviours, desired outcomes, and pain points; and (3) suggest gluten-free instant noodle product prototypes suitable for each country...'
date: 2022-10-01
venue: 'Foods'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.3390/foods11162437'
citation: 'Sae-Eaw, A., Wongsaichia, S., Giacalone, D., Naruetharadhol, P., & Ketkaew, C. (2022). Conceptualizing a gluten-free instant noodle prototype using environmental sustainability aspects: A cross-national qualitative study on Thai and Danish consumers. <i>Foods, 11</i>, 2437.'
---

[Download paper here](https://www.mdpi.com/2304-8158/11/16/2437/pdf)

Gluten-free food products have been developed to satisfy the needs of consumers with celiac disease. However, there has been little research on the product feature development of sustainable gluten-free instant noodles through a qualitative study to explore the customer insights related to environmental attitude and purchase decision. Using a cross-national comparative study between Thai and Danish consumers, this study aims to (1) identify the target customer segments for each country; (2) explore the target customer segments regarding behaviours, desired outcomes, and pain points; and (3) suggest gluten-free instant noodle product prototypes suitable for each country. With a qualitative interview approach, 60 target customers (30 Thai and 30 Danish) were recruited to participate in this research. In addition, a thematic analysis was undertaken to examine their behaviours, desired outcomes, and pain points toward sustainable gluten-free instant noodle products. The findings revealed that convenience-oriented customers were the target segment of gluten-free instant noodle products in Thailand. This segment primarily focused on convenience as the main reason for consuming instant noodles and had common pain points in terms of taste. In contrast, environment-oriented customers were the target customer segment in Denmark. This segment consisted primarily of young women who eat less meat and shared common pain points such as difficulty accessing more sustainable options. Hence, there is a need to educate customers in Thailand (an emerging economy) and increase their awareness regarding environmental sustainability and consumption. 

Recommended citation: Sae-Eaw, A., Wongsaichia, S., Giacalone, D., Naruetharadhol, P., & Ketkaew, C. (2022). Conceptualizing a gluten-free instant noodle prototype using environmental sustainability aspects: A cross-national qualitative study on Thai and Danish consumers. <i>Foods, 11</i>, 2437.
